Welcome! In this video we are going to be comparing the top
5 VR platforms, as they stand at the moment. Obviously all this
information is quite subject to change and my apologies if you watch this
in a few months time and there is new news available, but we will do the best
we can to keep this video up to date. We will be comparing the
various strenghs and weaknesses of each of the platforms, so that you can make an
informed decision about which platform you want to start developing for.
And we're going to just cover a few of the basic VR terms
to help you out with understanding all this jargon and being able
to read news articles and understand what they're talking about.
So, the first thing, let's just copare these devices
based on their price and their resolution. This is a very
basic measure, but right at the bottom end of the scale we have
the Google Cardboard. So, what is the Google Cardboard? Let's take a look!
If we just do a quick Google search, we have the "google
cardboard". Now as you see, it's incredibly cheap.
Now, why is it cheap? If we go and have a look at the images, you'll
see why it is cheap. It is essentially very DIY. All you have are these
two high diopter lenses stuck in a piece of cardboard,
and in the back you have to slip in your phone. So the quality of this experience
depends a lot on the phone that you slip in the back, and in fact,
you can see the resolution can vary from anywhere like an Axis 4
all the way up to a Galazy Note, which has an insanely high resolution.
In fact, some of the highest resolutions of all these devices,
but it really depends and the speed of the phone is quite important, in fact,
at two. So, really if you've got a good high end phone, the cardboard
might be a very good option for you. Then, next up is this
Samsung Gear VR, which also uses a phone in the back, but it has to be a Samsung
phone, it has the be one of the Samsung Galaxy Notes. And
the price point is $99, so it is more
expensive but we will show you why in just a second. So, the Samsung
Gear VR and,
as you'll see, it's a much more refined piece of kit,
and in fact, your phone has to plug in with a connector into the back here.
And the reason for that is there are extra sensors inside
the unit itself. You can see the touchpad, being shown on the side here.
We've obviously got volume buttons, a back button, this is tap sensitive,
so that gives you a few modes of interaction. But also,
there are sensors inside the body that help you detect movement
and tilting of the head, so it does a much better job
than the onboard sensors of the phone itself. So, it's a slightly
more polished experience but still using a phone, and as you can see, the highest resolution achievable
is there with the Galaxy Note again. Now, into
the big players! We have the Oculus Rift Consumer Version 1, which is coming out
this month, as of recording, and the prices is relatively
high. It's up around the $600 mark!
Now, this is the poster child of VR, and as you can see the resolution is slightly
less. Let's just take a look at what the Oculus Rift is, in case you've not seen one yet.
So, it's the Oculus Rift CV1,
is Consumer Version 1 in case you're interested. As you can see,
it has this fun rig at the back with your
earphones here and this device
is to track your head position. So,
basically it's fairly advanced in comparison
to just sticking a phone in. It has all the screen built in and it plugs into a high end
PC, so you can get much better performance. Then, we have
the PlayStation VR, also known as Project Morpheus in the past, which is slightly
cheaper than the Oculus Rift at only around $400,
and this is probably because PlayStation is very heavily subsidizing it.
It does have a slightly low resolution and generally lower spec, and because it works
with the PS4, you probably can't get the same sort of performance.
Then, the big heavy weight player is the HTC Vive!
So, I'll show you the PlayStation VR first.
It is fairly pretty looking,
very attractive kind of... [Laughs] It looks like an MRI in some senses,
but yeah, quite cool! Then, we have the
HTC Vive
which is the heavy weight player. As you can see, it's ugly as anything
but it is kind of backed up by Steam and HTC
and has some really cool extra sensors in here, which we'll
get into a little bit later, which are there to justify its high price
point of being around twice as expensive as the PlayStation VR.
And as you can see, resolutionwise, it's pretty much on a par with the Oculus Rift.
So, why is resolution not
the only thing we need to worry about? With a 1080 p
television, your typical field of view for this television is about
30 degrees. So, the resolution looks good because the
number of pixels you have per degree is very high,
it's very good, but with VR we typically have more in the order of
100 degrees of field of view. And that 1080 p
spread over 100 starts to look a little bit shoddy, in fact, and
you start to notice the pixels a bit more. So, actually we have a much
tighter, harder requirement on our pixel density.
So, let's compare things in terms of their pixel density! The Cardboard
has quite a low field of view and a high variation in terms of resolutions,
so the pixels per degree that we can achieve are anywhere from 7 to 14.
And in fact, 14 is going to be the best pixel per degree that we can get
when it comes to VR devices. In fact,
the highest pixel per degree that a human eye can detect the difference of
is probably about 60 pixels per degree, so we're still quite a way off
the human limit. The Samsung Great VR, on the other hand, is very
similar. The field of view is slightly bigger, but the pixel so
that has a knock on effect that the pixels per degree are slightly less, but that
a higher field of view does mean a more immersive
experience in VR. The Oculus Rift
goes for that more immersive experience, by making it 110 degrees, so it's
substantially more and the resolution is slightly lower. That allows them
to keep the frame-rate rally high and keep motion sickness down.
The PlayStation VR around the same, slightly smaller
field of view to compensate for the smaller resolution so that the
pixels per degree stays about the same, and the HTC Vive is
almost identical to the Oculus Rift. Let's
compare these devices in terms of their performance now! So, we have
Google Cardboard, which is limited by phone hardware, as is the Gear
VR. Whereas the Oculus Rift CV1 and
the HTC Vive
are high end PC's. In fact, you'll probably need to be shelling out around
another grand for your PC. So, if you don't already have
a high end spec PC for your gaming, then these
are going to be very expensive platforms for you. Whereas if you already have a PlayStation
4, then the PlayStation VR might be the thing for you;
although obviously the performance won't be as great as if you have
$1,000 PC. As for sickness, most of these platforms
have done their best to minimize it. Unfortunately the Gear
VR still does have some problems with that. On the one side,
with Google Cardboard, because it looks like you're looking through binoculars, your
tolerance for the lag is actually quite good
and your brain doesn't really get tricked, whereas the Gear VR is in this
uncanny valley where your mind gets tricked a little bit, but because it doesn't have
the degrees of freedom, which we'll see in a minute, it does make you feel a little
bit sick, especially with extended use. Whereas the more high end
platforms seem to be quite good at this, it also depends on the type of game
you're playing. If it's a car racing game, you might be more likely to vomit.
So, the degrees of freedom! This is an interesting one! So,
What we're talking about here is with 3 Degrees of Freedom, we're just talking about rotating
our head, but with 6 degrees we're actually talking about
translating, so moving around the room. So, with
the Cardboard and the Samsung Gear VR, we really can't do any movement around
the room. All we have are the 3 axis of rotation and that is what can contribute to
the sickness in the Gear VR. Now, the Oculus Rift
Consumer Version 1 has partially 6 degrees of freedom, in the sense that
we have to mostly sit still, but if we move our head slightly that
actually does show up in the game and that contributes to its better
sickness or lack of sickness I should say. And the
PlayStation VR does exactly the same thing. However, the HTC
Vive does much better 6 axis
control, which allows you to move around your room, so
you can... A lot of the games are built around having a space that
you can work in and just move around all your
couch, and hopefully you'd move your couch out of the way, but you can move around the
space in your living room and use their controllers to manipulate the game.
So, it's really an immersive experience, where you use your own legs to move yourself
around. As for interaction media, this is a
very interesting point. The Google Cardboard is very limited.
At most it will have one button, it depends which version you get, so let's just have a
look. So, the Google Cardboard versions...
We'll just look at the Google Cardboard. So you'll notice that some of these don't even have a
trigger, whereas some of your models will have a little trigger
at the side, which basically activates
a touch on the screen, and that allows you to do
at least some sort of basic interaction with it.
So, that's very limited. The Gear VR
has a trackpad on the side, with tap and
you can optionally buy a bluetooth hand-held controller, though
those are quite expensive for what they are. Now, the Oculus Rift
CV1 is now shipping with an Xbox controller, with
two hand-held controllers shipping later on
this year. So, those hand-held controllers will really be something to look out for, as they'll
increase the amount of interactions you can have with your game. The PlayStation
VR is backwards compatible with the PS Move controllers, so
that already effectively gives you this two handed controller,
and the HTC Vive has some of the best controller. They're two handed
controllers are very faithful to their location, and
apparently people have been using them in games with light sabers and
really believe that the light saber has been held in their hand. So, it's quite
impressive the level of fidelity that you can get with the HTC Vive.
As for development environments and
platforms and marketplaces, so what are we going to be developing for? The Google
Cardboard you can develop on OSX or Windows. You'll need OSX
for developing for an iPhone, but for Android you could use
either, and then, there is the marketplace. You can distribute
in the App Store or Google Play, depending on which platform you are developing for.
The Samsung Gear VR is Android only, so OSX and Windows,
and again, you can do it in the Google Play store or you have the option of using
Oculus Share as well, which is Oculus's own game sharing
platform. The Oculus Rift again, now is
only Windows, and Windows sadly, no OSX for the time being.
But the Oculus Share is how, where you distribute things
that'll also be direct in Steam and everything else that you usually get for PC games.
The PlayStation VR is a closed developer program,
but presumably you'll need Windows to get onto that
closed developer program. The platform, obviously the PlayStation 4,
and the marketplace is the PlayStation Store. The
HTC Vive, again this is Windows, and Windows and
obviously being in league with Steam VR, it's going...
Being Stream VR or being in league with Steam, they
are distributed with Steam or direct. So,
time for a challenge for you! I would like you to choose your device
that you're going to do this course with. You may choose more than one, I'm not limiting you,
it depends on your funds and budget. So, I'd like you to review the
tables above, and by the way, if you don't know where to get those tables, you can go to the
beginning the first lecture of this section and you can go to the
Google Doc, where those tables are. And then, I'd like you to
list your game development goals. This'll help you give a base
for what you need, and then, share your choice in the discussions
and share some justifications about why you have chosen to go with
that platform. OK, I'll see you in the next video,
after you have done that!